THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
SICK LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 9
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.
This procedure does not form part of any employee's contract of employment and the Institute 
may amend it or decide not to apply it in particular cases, at any time.


The Institute may decide to make a referral to the Institute’s appointed Medical Advisor(s) for an 
Occupational Health Assessment in case of any concern(s) regarding individual employee’s health 
or sickness absences. The aim of such referral would usually be to assess employee’s fitness for 
work or part(s) of it and to consider the level of support that can be offered by the Institute. 
Employees will be asked for their explicit written consent for the Institute to access their medical 
details.


Procedure:
Staff members who are away from work due to sickness must conform to the following procedure:
a) Employees must inform the line manager of absence from work through sickness or injury 
on the first day of absence by 10:00 am, or as soon as reasonably possible. If an employee is 
not able to notify the line manager, someone (e.g. a family member) should do so on his/her 
behalf. If the illness continues, the line manager should be kept informed of the likely date 
of return to work. If the line manager and/or HR department is not informed about the 
reason for absence by 10:00am on any day of absence, they will contact the employee at the 
numbers provided in their personnel records.

b) When reporting absence from work due to sickness, employees should give as much of 
following information as possible, in particular:
o The nature of illness - if the employee does not wish to reveal the exact nature of the 
illness s/he must indicate broadly the cause of the absence. If they are not willing to 
disclose this, the nature of the illness should be described as personal;
o The anticipated length of absence;
o If the absence is expected to be of 7 calendar days or more, any steps s/he is taking in 
relation to it e.g. details of any doctor's appointments arranged;
o Details of any outstanding or urgent work that needs to be dealt with during the 
absence;
o Details of how s/he can be contacted if necessary, especially where the employee is 
staying at a different address during their absence.
o Details of any referral by his/her GP to the DWP ‘Fit for Work’ service, including 
sharing the ‘Return to Work Plan’ with their manager and HR.


c) During absence from work, employees must be contactable by the Institute unless 
hospitalised etc and must also inform the Institute as soon as possible of any change in the 
date of the employee’s anticipated return to work;


d) Employees should expect to be contacted during their absence by their manager who will want 
to enquire after their health and be advised, if possible, of the expected return date. Given the 
nature of the Institute and its operational requirements, notification of absence and monitoring 
absence are essential. 


e) After any absence from 1 to 7 days a Self-Certificate of Sickness form1 must be signed, and 
submitted to the HR Department immediately on returning to work;

f)If the sick leave lasts for more than 7 days a doctor’s certificate must be obtained and 
submitted to the HR Department immediately on returning to work.


g) Failure to give notification and provide certification of sickness absence may result in loss 
of pay. Late notification may also result in the payment of Statutory Sick Pay being delayed.


h) For all absences, a return-to-work discussion may be held with the line manager, ranging 
from an informal check that an employee is feeling better for short absences to a one-toone meeting for longer absences; i.e. in case of five short term sickness absences or a total 
of 10 working days during any six-month period (pro rata for part-time and fixed-term staff). 
The purpose of this meeting is to establish whether there are any underlying reasons behind 
the illness, and to facilitate the employee’s return to work.


i) Where an employee becomes ill while at work and feels too unwell to continue working, s/he 
must speak to his/her manager who will give permission for the individual to leave their work 
(either temporarily or for the day) and for him/her to seek medical advice where appropriate. 


j) The Institute reserves the right to send employee home if it considers that the employee is
not fit enough to work. Where this happens employee will be considered to be on sickness 
absence and paid in accordance with our sick pay rules. To return to work the employee
will be required to provide a fit note from his/her doctor which signs him/her fit to work.


k) Any failure to comply with this provision will be considered a serious breach of the 
employee’s obligations and, depending on the circumstances, may result in disciplinary 
action, up to and including summary dismissal for proven acts of gross misconduct.
Sickness during holidays and Institute closure days
If an employee has been ill during annual leave or the Institute’s closure days, a doctor’s medical 
certificate is required to claim those days back.


Unauthorised absence
If employees do not report for work and have not telephoned their line manager to explain the 
reason for their absence, the line manager will try to contact the employee by telephone and in 
writing if necessary. This should not be treated as a substitute by the employee for reporting 
sickness absence.


If an employee fails to follow the sickness absence procedures set out in this document, he/she 
may be subject to action under the Institute's Disciplinary Procedure. Absence that has not been 
notified according to the sickness absence reporting procedure will be treated as unauthorised 
absence which may result in disciplinary action.


In exceptional circumstances, the Institute reserves the right to withhold Occupational Sick Pay if 
an individual does not cooperate with reasonable requests from HR or their line manager or, does 
not comply with the requirements within this Policy.


Line managers should contact HR directly to discuss individual cases if the reason given for the 
absence may be caused by work or may impact on the employee’s ability to undertake a particular 
work activity, or if there is repeated absence or continued absence. Similarly, if an employee 
believes that his/her condition may be related to an activity at work s/he should inform his/her 
manager who will contact HR.


Disabilities
Where an individual's sickness is disability-related, such cases will be managed in accordance with 
the legislation. Advice on specific cases can be sought from HR.
The Institute is aware that sickness absence may result from a disability. At each stage of the 
sickness absence procedure particular consideration will be given to whether there are reasonable 
adjustments that could be made to the requirements of a job or other aspects of working 
arrangements that will provide support at work, improve attendance and/or assist a return to work.
If an employee considers that s/he is affected by a disability or any medical condition which affects 
their ability to undertake their work, s/he should inform their line manager as soon as possible.
The Institute reserves the right to withhold Occupational sick pay during a grievance or disciplinary 
investigation or process.


Short-term intermittent absences
 In the case of five short term sickness absences or a total of 10 working days during any sixmonth period (pro-rata for part-time staff), the line manager will raise concern with the 
member of staff and investigate any particular circumstances concerning these periods of 
sickness absences. If appropriate, the staff member may be asked to undergo a medical 
examination by an independent doctor, at the expense of AKU-ISMC. The employee may also 
be asked to give written permission to AKU-ISMC to have access to a medical report in its 
complete form on the employee’s condition prepared by the independent medical practitioner, 
in order to establish the likely length of absence and the long-term effect on capability in 
relation to job performance and attendance at work.


Sickness absence meetings procedure
The Institute may apply this procedure whenever it is considered necessary, including, for example, 
if the employee:
 has been absent due to illness on a number of occasions;
 has been absent occasionally but the instances of the employee’s absences suggest a pattern or 
indicate to issue(s) considered worthy of investigation by the management;
 has discussed matters at a return-to-work interview that require investigation; and/or
 has been absent for more than 10 consecutive working days.
Unless it is impractical to do so, the Institute will give the employee 5 working days' written notice 
of the date, time and place of a sickness absence meeting. This will put any concerns about the 
employee’s sickness absence and the basis for those concerns in writing or otherwise advise why 
the meeting is being called. A reasonable opportunity for the employee to consider this before a 
meeting will be provided.


The meeting will be conducted by the line manager and will normally be attended by a member of 
HR. Employees may bring a colleague to the meeting.
Employees must take all reasonable steps to attend a meeting. Failure to do so without good reason 
may be treated as misconduct. If the employee or their colleague is unable to attend at the time 
specified, the employee should immediately inform his/her line manager who will seek to agree an 
alternative time.


A meeting may be adjourned if the line manager is awaiting receipt of information, needs to gather 
any further information or give consideration to matters discussed at a previous meeting. The 
employee will be given a reasonable opportunity to consider any new information obtained before 
the meeting is reconvened.


Confirmation of any decision made at a meeting, the reasons for it, and of the right of appeal will 
be given to the employee in writing within 5 working days of a sickness absence meeting (unless 
this time scale is not practicable, in which case it will be provided as soon as is practicable).
If, at any time, the line manager considers that the employee has taken or is taking sickness absence 
when they are not unwell, they may refer matters to be dealt with under the Institute’s Disciplinary 
Procedure.


The procedure adopted is as follows:
Stage 1 – Informal Sickness Absence Review Meeting
The purpose of the informal Review Meeting is:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To give the employee the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns;
 To decide whether any further action is required such as a referral to HR
 To set a target for improvement and a period over which absence levels will be monitored;
 To arrange for support or work adjustments; and
 To inform the employee that if attendance does not improve within the time period being 
monitored a formal Sickness Absence Review meeting will be held.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
When setting targets for improvement, managers will need to take into account the individual 
circumstances of the case, any advice received from HR, the impact of any underlying medical 
condition or disability, and any reasonable work place adjustments that need to be put in place to 
enable the employee to improve their attendance. Managers must review these targets and 
achievement levels with the employee every two weeks over the next 2-3 months as agreed.
The outcome of the Sickness Absence Review meeting will be confirmed to the individual in 
writing by their manager within 10 working days, and a copy sent to HR.


As confirmed at the Sickness Absence Review Meeting the individual's sickness absence pattern 
will be monitored over an appropriate, specified period. During this period, regular reviews should 
be undertaken by the manager to review the employee’s attendance, give them an opportunity to 
discuss any problems they have encountered, discuss the need for further medical advice and 
ensure that any reasonable adjustments recommended have been put in place and that they are 
receiving the support needed to improve their attendance at work.


Stage 2 – Formal Sickness Absence Review Meeting
If during the specified monitoring period following the informal Sickness Absence Review 
meeting, absence exceeds the improvement target set this will trigger a formal Sickness Absence 
Review meeting with the manager and HR. The purpose of the 2nd Review Meeting will be as 
follows:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To review the steps that have been taken to support him/her in achieving the required level 
of attendance;
 To give the employee the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns;
 To discuss any HR and/or medical advice that has been received;
 To decide whether any new information requires further medical investigation
 To set a target for improvement and a period over which absence levels will be monitored;
 To inform the employee that if attendance does not improve a final Sickness Absence Review 
meeting will be held.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
Again, if the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, 
s/he may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed.


The outcome of the Formal Sickness Absence Review meeting will be confirmed to the individual 
in writing by their manager within 10 working days and a copy sent to HR.
Regular reviews will be undertaken by the manager during the monitoring period. A Final Caution 
may be given for unsatisfactory attendance and this will be confirmed to the individual in writing. 
If it has been decided not to issue a final caution, but to extend the monitoring period, the 
individual's sickness absence pattern will be monitored over an appropriate, specified period. 
If, after a period of satisfactory improvement based on the targets set, the individual's absence 
levels reach those defined above (repeated short term absence), Stage 2 of the Sickness Absence 
Policy may be repeated.


Stage 3 - Final Absence Review Meeting: Dismissal
If during the specified monitoring period following the issue of a final caution, absence exceeds 
the improvement target this will trigger a Final Sickness Absence Review meeting. The meeting 
will normally be with the Head of Department, the line manager of the employee and HR.
The purpose of this meeting will be as follows:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To review the steps that have been taken to support him/her in achieving the required level 
of attendance;
 To give him/her the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns, or to highlight 
any mitigating circumstances that they wish to be taken into account; 
 To discuss any medical advice that has been received;
 To decide whether any new information requires further referral to Institute’s medical 
advisor(s).
 To inform them of whether they will be dismissed on the grounds of capability, or whether 
the final caution will be extended to allow further time for a sustained improvement;
 If the final caution is extended, to set a target for improvement and a period over which 
absence levels will be monitored.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
If the work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he may request 
postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested alternative is 
reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be postponed.
Following the meeting, a decision will be taken by the Head of Department to either dismiss the 
employee on the grounds of capability, or, to extend the final caution to allow further time for a 
sustained improvement. The option of allowing further time for improvement will only be 
considered if there is evidence that this is likely to lead to the required improvement in attendance.
In the event that the final caution is extended, the individual's sickness absence pattern will be 
monitored over an appropriate, specified period.


Regular reviews will be undertaken by the line manager during the monitoring period
The Head of Department will confirm the decision, the reasons for it and the right of appeal in 
the case of dismissal, in writing to the individual. If, following an extension of the final caution 
and after a period of satisfactory improvement based on the target set, the individual's absence 
levels deteriorate and reach those defined above (repeated short term absence), Stage 3 of the 
Sickness Absence Policy may be repeated which may result in a decision to dismiss the employee 
on the grounds of incapacity.


Right to be accompanied at meetings
The employee may bring a work colleague to any meeting or appeal meeting under this procedure.
Their details must be given to the manager conducting the meeting, in good time before it takes 
place.


Employees are allowed reasonable time off from duties without loss of pay to act as a colleague. 
However, they are not obliged to act as a colleague and may decline a request if they so wish.
A colleague may make representations, ask questions, and sum up, but will not be allowed to 
answer questions on behalf of the employee. The employee may confer privately with their 
companion at any time during a meeting.


If the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he 
may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed. A representative from HR may also be present to give advice on procedure and take 
notes.


Long term Sickness Absence
Managers should seek the advice of HR in cases of long-term sickness absence of 4 weeks or more, 
sooner if there is indication that the health issue may be related to work. Evidence based guidelines 
recommend early intervention, particularly for mental health or musculoskeletal problems.
They should also maintain contact with the employee in order to reduce feelings of isolation, to 
remain informed about the likely duration of the sickness absence and to keep them in touch with 
any major workplace developments. Managers should not, however, have detailed discussions 
regarding work-related issues with employees who are absent. The employee has a responsibility 
to update his/her manager regularly on his/her likely date of return to work.


In such cases, a referral to the Institute is appointed Medical Advisor(s) will usually be made for 
advice on the employee's fitness for work, a likely date of return and advice on a rehabilitation 
programme, if necessary, to enable the employee to return to work. Where the hours of work are 
reduced as part of a rehabilitation programme, this would normally be on full pay for a limited 
period. If the normal hours of work are reduced over a longer period, a corresponding reduction 
in salary may result. However, the individual circumstances of the case will be taken into account.
Where appropriate, once medical advice has been received, the individual will be invited in writing 
to a meeting with his/her manager and HR. S/he may choose to be accompanied by a colleague, 
and at least 7 calendar days’ notice will be given (unless the employee agrees in writing to less). If 
the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he 
may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed. If the individual is unable to travel, the meeting will be conducted via the telephone 
or, in exceptional circumstances, a meeting may take place at a venue nearer to his/her home. 
Alternatively, a written representation can be submitted.


If the employee is considered by the Medical Advisor(s) to be unfit to resume his/her duties, 
despite reasonable adjustments being made, job redesign, an amendment to the job description or 
redeployment into another type of work will be explored with advice from HR. Medical advice 
provided and the individual's views will be taken into account in the exploration of options. In 
some cases more than one meeting will be necessary. If reasonable adjustments or redeployment 
is not possible, HR will advise individuals of their entitlements in such circumstances. Following 
the meeting, the content of the discussion and any action to be taken, will be confirmed in writing.
If an employee is deemed unfit for employment, and after all the above options have been 
explored, consideration will be given to termination of his/her employment. The employee will be 
invited to attend a meeting with their Head of Department and HR to discuss the proposed 
termination of their employment. They will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the 
meeting (unless the employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied 
by a work colleague. If the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the 
appointed time, s/he may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where 
the suggested alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting 
will be postponed. Following consultation, if termination of employment is appropriate this will 
be confirmed in writing by HR. The right of appeal against the decision and the appeals procedure 
will also be explained.


If the employee is considered by Institute’s medical advisor(s) to be fit for work, this will be 
discussed with the individual and a return to work date will be set. In exceptional circumstances, 
if s/he does not return to work on the date advised, entitlement to Occupational Sick Pay may be 
withdrawn and disciplinary action may be taken. Entitlement to Statutory Sick Pay will not be 
affected if the continued absence is covered by a medical certificate.


Once the employee has returned to work, the manager should hold a return to work interview with 
them. At this meeting, any advice given by the Medical Advisor(s) for rehabilitation and support 
to facilitate a sustained return to work will be discussed, as well as any re-training that may be 
necessary and any expectations by the employee of any further periods of absence.


Appeal Procedure
Employees wishing to appeal against any formal action taken under this policy should submit a 
letter to the Head of HR within seven calendar days of the receipt of the formal letter confirming 
the action to be taken, stating the grounds of appeal. The formal action taken will remain in force 
unless and until it is modified as a result of the appeal.


An Appeal Hearing is not designed to re-hear the case but to examine the grounds of appeal. The 
appellant must be specific about the grounds of appeal; these will effectively form the agenda for 
the hearing. Appeals will be raised on one of the following grounds:
 the procedure: a failure to follow procedure had a material effect on the decision 
 the evidence did not support the conclusion reached: the penalty - was too severe given the 
circumstances of the case
 new evidence - which has genuinely come to light since the first hearing.


Arrangements will be made for appeals to be heard as soon as reasonably practicable.
The appellant will be notified as soon as possible of the time, date and place of the appeal hearing 
with a minimum of 10 working days’ notice. The appellant will be advised that s/he may be 
accompanied by a workplace colleague.


The Appeal will be heard by a panel of two senior members of staff who have not previously been 
involved in the case, and the Head of HR or nominated alternative.
Where the appeal is upheld, the formal action specified will no longer be applied. If the appeal is 
not upheld but the Appeal Panel considered the sanction to be inappropriate, this may be reviewed. 
Where an appeal against dismissal is upheld, the employee shall be paid in full for the period from 
the date of dismissal and continuity of service will be maintained.


The result of the appeal will normally be notified to the appellant orally within one day and in 
writing within 10 working days of the hearing. A copy will also be sent to any representative.
The decision of the Appeal Panel is final.


Sick Pay
Employees are entitled to SSP subject to the SSP rules, and in addition to this, employees may be 
entitled to his/her normal salary for sickness absence of up to 15 days in any one year, and subject 
to complying with sickness notification procedures. The Institute reserves the right to withhold 
sick pay in circumstances where the certification procedure described above has not been followed 
or it has reason to doubt the validity of the sickness absence claim and may request the employee
to undertake a medical examination by a doctor selected by it. Any payments over the SSP rate is 
at the discretion of the Institute and each case will be decided upon its own set of facts and 
circumstances.
For the current rates on Statutory Sick Pay, contact the HR Department.
Employees will not be permitted to use annual leave to claim contractual pay for sickness absences 
and the above sick pay policy will apply in all cases.


Medical Appointments
Employees may be allowed discretionary time off to attend medical appointments with prior 
approval of their supervisor. Employees must make every effort to ensure that their appointment 
times cause as little disruption as possible to the working day of the Institute. Where possible, 
early morning or late afternoon appointments should be booked. In addition, employees should 
ensure that their work/area of responsibility is covered by colleagues and that if need be their 
supervisor has made the necessary arrangements for temporary cover. Employees will be 
expected to make-up the hours taken for this purpose. HR will monitor the number of requests 
made by employees, and where excessive, the employee may be required to request annual leave
or unpaid leave in order to meet a medical appointment


THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
ANNUAL LEAVE
Policy # : __________________
Issue # : __________________
Revision # : __________________
Page : _________________
Effective Date : _________________
Effective Date : _________________
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / or any other copy of this policy, the
written copy held by the Policy owner in Human Resources will prevail.
Approved By: _______________________
VICE PRESIDENT
HUMAN RESOURCES


1. POLICY STATEMENT
Employees are entitled to paid annual leave and it is mandatory that they avail their annual
leave for the purpose of rest, recreation etc.


2. ELIGIBILITY
The annual leave entitlement is 23 working days per annum (excluding of weekend and
public holidays). Unutilized balance can be carried forward up to a maximum of 5 working
days to the next calendar year. Following category of employees and trainees are eligible:
 All full time employees (faculty and staff);
 All full time PGME, MCPS, and Management trainees;
 All part-time faculty and staff working for minimum of 50% of full-time work hours,
and having a contract of at least one year duration.


3. OBSERVATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
3.1 The annual leave entitlement commences on January 01 of each year. Those eligible
employees joining during the course of the year will have a pro-rated leave
entitlement for that calendar year from the date of their joining.
HR/LV-01
06
01 of 02
January 01, 2021
HR/LV-01 (Annual Leave) Page 02 of 02
3.2 Newly appointed eligible employees and trainees (refer point # 2 above) can avail
annual leave only after successful completion of their probationary period.
3.3 Employees and trainees will not be permitted to avail annual leave during the notice
period (prior to separation from the Organization), unless exceptional circumstances
warrant and approved in advance by respective supervisor / department head /
service line chiefs.
3.4 If individual leaves the Organization, unutilized annual leaves balance up to the last
working day will be encashed and for those who had availed excess annual leaves,
recovery will be made from their full and final settlement of dues.
3.5 During the leave period, individuals should not be called for any office related
work and should not be physically present to perform their duties unless
emergency circumstances warrant.
3.6 Individuals are not permitted to be engaged in any gainful employment or business
activities anywhere during their annual leave.

3.7 Sick leave may be subjoined with the annual leave subject to a medical certificate
being provided. However, casual leave cannot be subjoined.


4. PROCEDURE
4.1 Eligible employees or trainees who are proceeding on annual leaves are required to
complete online leave request form for approvals in advance. The leave can be
availed once the required approval is received from the respective authorities.
4.2 All supervisors / department heads / service line chiefs are expected to prepare
departmental leave plans in beginning of each calendar year. They should work
with their teams to plan leaves to ensure that all employees have the opportunity
to avail their eligible leave and the departments do not suffer due to shortage of
staff.
4.3 As part of the monthly attendance review process, the Time Administrator will be
responsible to ensure that all such absences are recorded in the attendance system
and the online request has been raised. 


THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
MATERNITY LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 5
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.
All women, regardless of length of service or hours of work, are entitled to 26 weeks Ordinary 
Maternity Leave (OML) and 26 weeks Additional Maternity leave (AML). 


Employees who qualify are entitled to up to 39 weeks' SMP, which covers the duration of OML
plus 13 weeks of AML. In order to qualify, the employee must: 
 have been continuously employed by the Institute for at least 26 weeks at the end of the 
Qualifying Week (QW) and must still be employed during that week.
 have average weekly earnings in the eight weeks up to and including the QW not less than 
the lower earnings limit for National Insurance contributions.
 still be pregnant 11 weeks before the start of her Expected Week of Childbirth (EWC) (or 
will have already given birth).
 provide a MAT B1 form stating her EWC.
 give the Institute proper notification of her pregnancy in accordance with the rules set out 
above.


At the discretion of the Institute, AKU-ISMC offers the following non-contractual Maternity Pay 
Benefit to its staff who have completed at least one year’s service by the EWC. Eligible employees 
will receive maternity pay for a total of 39 weeks as follows:
 The first 12 weeks of Maternity leave is at full pay. 
 The next 12 weeks are at half pay plus the lower rate Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP). 
 During the rest of OML (i.e. 2 weeks) salary at lower rate SMP is applicable. 
 During AML, only SMP will be paid for the first 13 weeks if they meet the above criteria. 
 If an employee receives a pay rise that is effective during the relevant period for calculating 
SMP, and is effective during ordinary maternity leave and additional maternity leave she 
gets the benefit of that pay rise in calculating her entitlement to statutory maternity pay.
For the current rates on SMP, contact the Head of Administration.


Employees will continue to accrue holiday entitlement during AML and will also be entitled to 
other contractual benefits such as life and health insurance throughout the period of maternity 
leave. However, employee will have a right to pension contributions for the period of paid 
maternity leave only i.e. up to 39 weeks.


After OML, the employee has the right to return to her old job unless a redundancy situation has 
arisen, in which case, the employee will be consulted and offered a suitable alternative vacancy. An 
employee who returns to work after AML will also be entitled to return to her old job but if this 
is not feasible an equivalent post will be offered on terms and conditions which are not less 
favourable than her original job. 


If possible, the Institute will endeavour to consult with the 
employee about any proposed changes to her job at the end of the maternity leave.
Upon expiry of the leaves applied (either OML or AML), if an employee does not intend to return 
to work, she should give at least the period of notice required by her contract of employment.

 
Provided that an employee meets all the other conditions, she can still take maternity leave if the 
child is:
 stillborn after 24 weeks of pregnancy
 born alive at any point of the pregnancy
Maternity Allowance
Women who are not entitled to SMP but meet qualifying conditions based on their recent 
employment and earnings records may claim Maternity Allowance (MA). To qualify for MA, a 
woman must have:
 been employed and/or self-employed for at least 26 weeks in the 66 weeks up 
to and including the week before the baby is due. This 66-week period is known 
as the Test Period. Part weeks are counted as full weeks; and
 earned on average at least £30 or more a week over any 13 weeks in the Test 
Period. 


MA is to be paid for a maximum continuous period of 39 weeks. The weekly rate is based on 
employee’s average weekly earnings. MA is paid at a standard rate or at a rate equal to 90% of 
average gross weekly earnings, whichever is lower.
MA can start from the 11th week before the week the baby is due and the latest from the day 
following the birth.
Provision for Antenatal Care
If an employee is pregnant, she is entitled to paid time off for the purposes of receiving antenatal 
care. Ante-natal care may include relaxation or parent craft classes as well as medical examinations, 
if these are recommended by a registered practitioner or midwife. Employees are however, 
expected to try to avoid taking time off work if they can reasonably arrange classes or examinations 
outside working hours.
Fathers and partners have the right to unpaid time off to accompany a pregnant woman to up to 
two antenatal appointments.
Except for the first appointment, the employee must supply:
 a certificate from a registered medical practitioner confirming her pregnancy;
 an appointment card/letter.
Maternity Leave Notification
Maternity leave can commence any time after the beginning of the 11th week before the EWC, 
which is the 29th week of pregnancy. To be entitled to Maternity leave the employee must follow 
the strict notification rules outlined below:
 a week begins at midnight between Saturday and Sunday;
 “Childbirth” is the birth of a child any time after the 24th week of pregnancy, whether the child 
is living or stillborn. 
 The birth of a stillborn baby before the 24th week is classed as a miscarriage, and is covered by 
the Sick pay rules.


Before commencing her Maternity leave, the employee must submit a Maternity Leave Application
form to the line manager, by the 15th week before the week baby due (EWC) and give written 
notice of the following:
 the fact that she is pregnant
 the EWC; and
 the date she intends to commence maternity leave.
The line manager will respond to this notification within 28 days stating the date the employee is 
expected to return to work after she finishes her full maternity leave entitlement, either OML or 
AML.


In the event of the baby being born early, Maternity leave begins automatically and the 28 day 
notification is waived. Notification of the birth must be made as soon as possible to avoid losing 
the right to Maternity leave.
In the event that the baby is born late, the employee is not allowed to return to work within 2 
weeks of childbirth. 


An employee must give eight weeks' notice of her return date if she wishes to return to work 
before the end of the ordinary and additional maternity leave.
Employees may work for up to ten 'keeping in touch' (KIT) days during their leave period, at the 
above maternity pay. The KIT time could be for one hour or a whole day. The decision to 
undertake a KIT day must be made by agreement between the employee and her line manager. 
The KIT day will not bring an employee's maternity leave period to an end. The Institute will not 
demand that any such KIT work is undertaken and the employee has no right to undertake such 
work.


Sick Leave during Pregnancy
If the employee is ill before the 29th week of pregnancy, the absence is treated as Sick leave whether 
or not it is pregnancy-related.
If the employee is ill after 29th week of pregnancy with a pregnancy related sickness, she can choose 
whether to start her Maternity leave (rules regarding Maternity leave apply) or take Sick leave.
If she is absent due to a pregnancy related sickness any time within the 4-week period before the 
EWC, the Maternity leave is automatically triggered, even if she has not given 28 days’ notice. 
Maternity leave is not triggered if the illness is not pregnancy-related.
Once Maternity leave has started, the law does not allow the employee to return to work until after 
childbirth.


Health and safety
The Institute has a duty to take care of the health and safety of all employees. The Institute is also 
required to carry out a risk assessment which may include assessing the workplace risks to women 
who are pregnant, have recently given birth or are breastfeeding where the work is of a kind which 
could involve a risk of harm or danger to their health and safety or the health and safety of their 
baby and the risk arises from either processes, working conditions or physical, chemical or 
biological agents in the workplace. If applicable, the Institute will provide employees with 
information as to any risks identified in any risk assessment. If the risk assessment reveals that an 
employee would be exposed to health hazards in carrying out her normal job duties, the Institute 
will take such steps as are reasonably necessary to avoid those risks, such as altering her working 
conditions. In some cases, this may mean offering the employee suitable alternative work (if 
available) on terms and conditions which are not substantially less favourable. 
If it is not possible for the Institute to alter an employee’s working conditions to remove the risks 
to her health and there is no suitable alternative work available to offer her on a temporary basis, 
the Institute may suspend the employee from work on maternity grounds until such time as there 
are no longer any risks to her health. This may be for the remainder of the employee’s pregnancy 
until the commencement of her maternity leave. If an employee is suspended in these 
circumstances, her employment will continue during the period of the suspension and it does not 
in any way affect the employee’s statutory or contractual employment and maternity rights. The 
employee will be entitled to receive her normal salary and contractual benefits during the period 
of her suspension, unless she has unreasonably refused an offer of suitable alternative employment. 


Contact during maternity leave
Shortly before maternity leave starts, the Institute will discuss the arrangements for the employee 
to keep in touch during her leave, should the employee wish to do so. The Institute reserves the 
right in any event to maintain reasonable contact with the employee from time to time during her 
maternity leave. This may be to discuss the employee’s plans for return to work, to discuss any 
special arrangements to be made or training to be given to ease her return to work or simply to 
update her on developments at work during her absence.


Additional paternity leave
If the employee’s EWC began on or after 3 April 2011 and she proposes to return to work early, 
her spouse, civil partner or cohabiting partner, or the father of the child, may then be eligible to 
take additional paternity leave (and additional statutory paternity pay (ASPP), if applicable) once 
the employee has returned to work.


The earliest that additional paternity leave may commence is 20 weeks after the date on which the 
baby is born and it must end no later than 12 months after the date of childbirth. The minimum 
period of additional paternity leave is two consecutive weeks and the maximum period is 26 weeks. 
The employee should obtain further details from her spouse’s or partner’s employer. If the 
employee wishes her spouse or partner to take additional paternity leave in this way, she will be 
required to submit a written and signed declaration form to that employer and she should be aware 
that it may also make additional enquiries of the Institute to verify its employee’s entitlement to 
additional paternity leave and pay.


THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
PARENTAL LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 2
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.


Employees must have completed one year’s service to qualify for Parental leave. Leave must be 
taken in blocks of 1 – 4 weeks (with an exception for parents with disabled children, in which case 
it may be taken as individual days) and a Parental Leave Application form must be completed and 
authorised by the line manager in advance.


The law entitles employees to be absent from work on parental leave in order to care for a 
natural or an adopted child or to make arrangements for the child’s welfare. This policy 
implements the relevant regulations.


Both mothers and fathers can take parental leave. The right to take parental leave enables 
natural mothers and fathers (as named on the child’s birth certificate) and adoptive mothers and 
fathers to each take up to 13 weeks’ unpaid time off work to care for their child. Parents who 
have acquired formal parental responsibility for a child also qualify. The period of leave to 
which a parent of a disabled child is entitled is 18 weeks.


In order to qualify for parental leave, employees must have completed one year’s continuous 
service with the Institute. Employees who have already taken part of their parental leave 
entitlement with a previous employer will not be able to take any further parental leave until they 
have completed one year’s service with the Institute.
Employees can choose to take parental leave:
 Up until the child’s fifth birthday.
 In adoption cases, for five years after the child is first placed with the family for adoption (or 
until the child’s 18th birthday if that comes sooner).
 In the case of a child with a disability, up until the child’s 18th birthday (a disabled child is one 
for whom disability living allowance has been awarded).


Parental leave is for each child, so in the case of twins, 13 weeks’ leave is provided for each child. 
Leave must be taken in blocks or multiples of one week. The exception to this is that parents of 
disabled children can take leave in blocks or multiples of one day. A maximum of four weeks’ 
parental leave can be taken in respect of any individual child in any year. Employees are required 
to give 21 days’ written notice of proposed parental leave dates. If leave is to be taken immediately 
after birth or adoption, 21 days’ written notice of the expected week of childbirth or the expected 
week of placement should be given.


The Institute reserves the right to postpone leave for up to six months where the operation of the 
Institute’s business would be unduly disrupted if the leave were taken at the time requested. For 
example, leave may be postponed during particularly busy periods, seasonal peaks or where a 
significant proportion of the Institute’s workforce have applied to be off from work at the same 
time. The Institute will confirm the postponement arrangements in writing no later than seven 
days after the employee’s notice to take leave. This letter will state the reason for postponement 
and set out the new dates of parental leave. The Institute will not postpone leave when an 
employee gives notice to take it immediately after the time the child is born or is placed with the 
family for adoption.


The Institute will keep records of parental leave taken. In addition, employees should note that 
the Institute requires them to produce evidence to confirm the employee is the parent or the 
person who is legally responsible for the child. This could take the form of production of a copy 
of the child’s birth certificate or the adoption papers and/or a copy of the letter awarding disability 
living allowance for a disabled child. For new employees, the Institute reserves the right to make 
enquiries of previous employers, or to seek a declaration from the employee about how much 
parental leave they have already taken. 
At the end of parental leave, an employee will be permitted to return to the same job they had 
before the leave. 
There is no contractual entitlement to remuneration for absences relating to parental leave.
Finally, if an employee behaves dishonestly in claiming an entitlement to parental leave, this is a 
serious disciplinary offence and will be dealt with in accordance with the Institute’s disciplinary 
procedure. It may lead to summary dismissal on the ground of gross misconduct.

The Aga Khan University Page 1 of 1 
Human Resources Department Document No 
HR/ BN-06 
Approved Date: October, 2010 
Revised Date: October, 2010 Title: PATERNITY LEAVE 
Date of Next Revision: October, 2012 
ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY Revision Number: 1 
POLICY STATEMENT:
It is the policy of AKU to grant a paid Paternity Leave of absence to eligible male 
employees. 


DEFINITIONS:
Paid Paternity Leave will be granted for a period of 3 consecutive days, upon the birth 
of a child to the spouse of the employee, provided in the dependant form at the time of 
joining or supported by a marriage certificate. The employee will not forfeit annual leave 
during the year. 


APPLICABLE TO:
Regular full-time male employees. 
OBSERVATIONS AND LIMITATIONS:
(a) Paternity leave can be granted 1 day prior to the estimated delivery date. 
(b) Paternity leave is not encashable and cannot be accumulated. 
(c) Earned Leave may be subjoined to Paternity Leave. However, the total leave 
period should not exceed 3 weeks. Any further leave will be unpaid and will be 
governed by the policy for unpaid leave. 


PROCEDURE:
(a) An employee requiring to proceed on Paternity Leave must inform his 
supervisor/ department head by submitting a leave form at least 2 months prior 
to the date from which leave is required. 
(b) The Department Head will forward the approved 'Leave Application' to the 
Human Resources Department for processing. 
(c) The employee is required to submit a report to her Department Head within 3 
days of duty resumption. 

