THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
MATERNITY LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 5
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.
All women, regardless of length of service or hours of work, are entitled to 26 weeks Ordinary 
Maternity Leave (OML) and 26 weeks Additional Maternity leave (AML). 


Employees who qualify are entitled to up to 39 weeks' SMP, which covers the duration of OML
plus 13 weeks of AML. In order to qualify, the employee must: 
 have been continuously employed by the Institute for at least 26 weeks at the end of the 
Qualifying Week (QW) and must still be employed during that week.
 have average weekly earnings in the eight weeks up to and including the QW not less than 
the lower earnings limit for National Insurance contributions.
 still be pregnant 11 weeks before the start of her Expected Week of Childbirth (EWC) (or 
will have already given birth).
 provide a MAT B1 form stating her EWC.
 give the Institute proper notification of her pregnancy in accordance with the rules set out 
above.


At the discretion of the Institute, AKU-ISMC offers the following non-contractual Maternity Pay 
Benefit to its staff who have completed at least one year’s service by the EWC. Eligible employees 
will receive maternity pay for a total of 39 weeks as follows:
 The first 12 weeks of Maternity leave is at full pay. 
 The next 12 weeks are at half pay plus the lower rate Statutory Maternity Pay (SMP). 
 During the rest of OML (i.e. 2 weeks) salary at lower rate SMP is applicable. 
 During AML, only SMP will be paid for the first 13 weeks if they meet the above criteria. 
 If an employee receives a pay rise that is effective during the relevant period for calculating 
SMP, and is effective during ordinary maternity leave and additional maternity leave she 
gets the benefit of that pay rise in calculating her entitlement to statutory maternity pay.
For the current rates on SMP, contact the Head of Administration.


Employees will continue to accrue holiday entitlement during AML and will also be entitled to 
other contractual benefits such as life and health insurance throughout the period of maternity 
leave. However, employee will have a right to pension contributions for the period of paid 
maternity leave only i.e. up to 39 weeks.


After OML, the employee has the right to return to her old job unless a redundancy situation has 
arisen, in which case, the employee will be consulted and offered a suitable alternative vacancy. An 
employee who returns to work after AML will also be entitled to return to her old job but if this 
is not feasible an equivalent post will be offered on terms and conditions which are not less 
favourable than her original job. 


If possible, the Institute will endeavour to consult with the 
employee about any proposed changes to her job at the end of the maternity leave.
Upon expiry of the leaves applied (either OML or AML), if an employee does not intend to return 
to work, she should give at least the period of notice required by her contract of employment.

 
Provided that an employee meets all the other conditions, she can still take maternity leave if the 
child is:
 stillborn after 24 weeks of pregnancy
 born alive at any point of the pregnancy
Maternity Allowance
Women who are not entitled to SMP but meet qualifying conditions based on their recent 
employment and earnings records may claim Maternity Allowance (MA). To qualify for MA, a 
woman must have:
 been employed and/or self-employed for at least 26 weeks in the 66 weeks up 
to and including the week before the baby is due. This 66-week period is known 
as the Test Period. Part weeks are counted as full weeks; and
 earned on average at least £30 or more a week over any 13 weeks in the Test 
Period. 


MA is to be paid for a maximum continuous period of 39 weeks. The weekly rate is based on 
employee’s average weekly earnings. MA is paid at a standard rate or at a rate equal to 90% of 
average gross weekly earnings, whichever is lower.
MA can start from the 11th week before the week the baby is due and the latest from the day 
following the birth.
Provision for Antenatal Care
If an employee is pregnant, she is entitled to paid time off for the purposes of receiving antenatal 
care. Ante-natal care may include relaxation or parent craft classes as well as medical examinations, 
if these are recommended by a registered practitioner or midwife. Employees are however, 
expected to try to avoid taking time off work if they can reasonably arrange classes or examinations 
outside working hours.
Fathers and partners have the right to unpaid time off to accompany a pregnant woman to up to 
two antenatal appointments.
Except for the first appointment, the employee must supply:
 a certificate from a registered medical practitioner confirming her pregnancy;
 an appointment card/letter.
Maternity Leave Notification
Maternity leave can commence any time after the beginning of the 11th week before the EWC, 
which is the 29th week of pregnancy. To be entitled to Maternity leave the employee must follow 
the strict notification rules outlined below:
 a week begins at midnight between Saturday and Sunday;
 “Childbirth” is the birth of a child any time after the 24th week of pregnancy, whether the child 
is living or stillborn. 
 The birth of a stillborn baby before the 24th week is classed as a miscarriage, and is covered by 
the Sick pay rules.


Before commencing her Maternity leave, the employee must submit a Maternity Leave Application
form to the line manager, by the 15th week before the week baby due (EWC) and give written 
notice of the following:
 the fact that she is pregnant
 the EWC; and
 the date she intends to commence maternity leave.
The line manager will respond to this notification within 28 days stating the date the employee is 
expected to return to work after she finishes her full maternity leave entitlement, either OML or 
AML.


In the event of the baby being born early, Maternity leave begins automatically and the 28 day 
notification is waived. Notification of the birth must be made as soon as possible to avoid losing 
the right to Maternity leave.
In the event that the baby is born late, the employee is not allowed to return to work within 2 
weeks of childbirth. 


An employee must give eight weeks' notice of her return date if she wishes to return to work 
before the end of the ordinary and additional maternity leave.
Employees may work for up to ten 'keeping in touch' (KIT) days during their leave period, at the 
above maternity pay. The KIT time could be for one hour or a whole day. The decision to 
undertake a KIT day must be made by agreement between the employee and her line manager. 
The KIT day will not bring an employee's maternity leave period to an end. The Institute will not 
demand that any such KIT work is undertaken and the employee has no right to undertake such 
work.


Sick Leave during Pregnancy
If the employee is ill before the 29th week of pregnancy, the absence is treated as Sick leave whether 
or not it is pregnancy-related.
If the employee is ill after 29th week of pregnancy with a pregnancy related sickness, she can choose 
whether to start her Maternity leave (rules regarding Maternity leave apply) or take Sick leave.
If she is absent due to a pregnancy related sickness any time within the 4-week period before the 
EWC, the Maternity leave is automatically triggered, even if she has not given 28 days’ notice. 
Maternity leave is not triggered if the illness is not pregnancy-related.
Once Maternity leave has started, the law does not allow the employee to return to work until after 
childbirth.


Health and safety
The Institute has a duty to take care of the health and safety of all employees. The Institute is also 
required to carry out a risk assessment which may include assessing the workplace risks to women 
who are pregnant, have recently given birth or are breastfeeding where the work is of a kind which 
could involve a risk of harm or danger to their health and safety or the health and safety of their 
baby and the risk arises from either processes, working conditions or physical, chemical or 
biological agents in the workplace. If applicable, the Institute will provide employees with 
information as to any risks identified in any risk assessment. If the risk assessment reveals that an 
employee would be exposed to health hazards in carrying out her normal job duties, the Institute 
will take such steps as are reasonably necessary to avoid those risks, such as altering her working 
conditions. In some cases, this may mean offering the employee suitable alternative work (if 
available) on terms and conditions which are not substantially less favourable. 
If it is not possible for the Institute to alter an employee’s working conditions to remove the risks 
to her health and there is no suitable alternative work available to offer her on a temporary basis, 
the Institute may suspend the employee from work on maternity grounds until such time as there 
are no longer any risks to her health. This may be for the remainder of the employee’s pregnancy 
until the commencement of her maternity leave. If an employee is suspended in these 
circumstances, her employment will continue during the period of the suspension and it does not 
in any way affect the employee’s statutory or contractual employment and maternity rights. The 
employee will be entitled to receive her normal salary and contractual benefits during the period 
of her suspension, unless she has unreasonably refused an offer of suitable alternative employment. 


Contact during maternity leave
Shortly before maternity leave starts, the Institute will discuss the arrangements for the employee 
to keep in touch during her leave, should the employee wish to do so. The Institute reserves the 
right in any event to maintain reasonable contact with the employee from time to time during her 
maternity leave. This may be to discuss the employee’s plans for return to work, to discuss any 
special arrangements to be made or training to be given to ease her return to work or simply to 
update her on developments at work during her absence.


Additional paternity leave
If the employee’s EWC began on or after 3 April 2011 and she proposes to return to work early, 
her spouse, civil partner or cohabiting partner, or the father of the child, may then be eligible to 
take additional paternity leave (and additional statutory paternity pay (ASPP), if applicable) once 
the employee has returned to work.


The earliest that additional paternity leave may commence is 20 weeks after the date on which the 
baby is born and it must end no later than 12 months after the date of childbirth. The minimum 
period of additional paternity leave is two consecutive weeks and the maximum period is 26 weeks. 
The employee should obtain further details from her spouse’s or partner’s employer. If the 
employee wishes her spouse or partner to take additional paternity leave in this way, she will be 
required to submit a written and signed declaration form to that employer and she should be aware 
that it may also make additional enquiries of the Institute to verify its employee’s entitlement to 
additional paternity leave and pay.