THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
PARENTAL LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 2
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.


Employees must have completed one year’s service to qualify for Parental leave. Leave must be 
taken in blocks of 1 – 4 weeks (with an exception for parents with disabled children, in which case 
it may be taken as individual days) and a Parental Leave Application form must be completed and 
authorised by the line manager in advance.


The law entitles employees to be absent from work on parental leave in order to care for a 
natural or an adopted child or to make arrangements for the child’s welfare. This policy 
implements the relevant regulations.


Both mothers and fathers can take parental leave. The right to take parental leave enables 
natural mothers and fathers (as named on the child’s birth certificate) and adoptive mothers and 
fathers to each take up to 13 weeks’ unpaid time off work to care for their child. Parents who 
have acquired formal parental responsibility for a child also qualify. The period of leave to 
which a parent of a disabled child is entitled is 18 weeks.


In order to qualify for parental leave, employees must have completed one year’s continuous 
service with the Institute. Employees who have already taken part of their parental leave 
entitlement with a previous employer will not be able to take any further parental leave until they 
have completed one year’s service with the Institute.
Employees can choose to take parental leave:
 Up until the child’s fifth birthday.
 In adoption cases, for five years after the child is first placed with the family for adoption (or 
until the child’s 18th birthday if that comes sooner).
 In the case of a child with a disability, up until the child’s 18th birthday (a disabled child is one 
for whom disability living allowance has been awarded).


Parental leave is for each child, so in the case of twins, 13 weeks’ leave is provided for each child. 
Leave must be taken in blocks or multiples of one week. The exception to this is that parents of 
disabled children can take leave in blocks or multiples of one day. A maximum of four weeks’ 
parental leave can be taken in respect of any individual child in any year. Employees are required 
to give 21 days’ written notice of proposed parental leave dates. If leave is to be taken immediately 
after birth or adoption, 21 days’ written notice of the expected week of childbirth or the expected 
week of placement should be given.


The Institute reserves the right to postpone leave for up to six months where the operation of the 
Institute’s business would be unduly disrupted if the leave were taken at the time requested. For 
example, leave may be postponed during particularly busy periods, seasonal peaks or where a 
significant proportion of the Institute’s workforce have applied to be off from work at the same 
time. The Institute will confirm the postponement arrangements in writing no later than seven 
days after the employee’s notice to take leave. This letter will state the reason for postponement 
and set out the new dates of parental leave. The Institute will not postpone leave when an 
employee gives notice to take it immediately after the time the child is born or is placed with the 
family for adoption.


The Institute will keep records of parental leave taken. In addition, employees should note that 
the Institute requires them to produce evidence to confirm the employee is the parent or the 
person who is legally responsible for the child. This could take the form of production of a copy 
of the child’s birth certificate or the adoption papers and/or a copy of the letter awarding disability 
living allowance for a disabled child. For new employees, the Institute reserves the right to make 
enquiries of previous employers, or to seek a declaration from the employee about how much 
parental leave they have already taken. 
At the end of parental leave, an employee will be permitted to return to the same job they had 
before the leave. 
There is no contractual entitlement to remuneration for absences relating to parental leave.
Finally, if an employee behaves dishonestly in claiming an entitlement to parental leave, this is a 
serious disciplinary offence and will be dealt with in accordance with the Institute’s disciplinary 
procedure. It may lead to summary dismissal on the ground of gross misconduct.