THE AGA KHAN UNIVERSITY (INTERNATIONAL) IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES 
SICK LEAVE POLICY
Policy #: Pages: 1 of 9
Issue #: 01 Effective date:
Revision: Effective date:
DISCLAIMER: If there is a discrepancy between the electronic copy of this policy and / 
or any other copy of this policy, the written copy held by the Policy Owner will prevail.
This procedure does not form part of any employee's contract of employment and the Institute 
may amend it or decide not to apply it in particular cases, at any time.


The Institute may decide to make a referral to the Institute’s appointed Medical Advisor(s) for an 
Occupational Health Assessment in case of any concern(s) regarding individual employee’s health 
or sickness absences. The aim of such referral would usually be to assess employee’s fitness for 
work or part(s) of it and to consider the level of support that can be offered by the Institute. 
Employees will be asked for their explicit written consent for the Institute to access their medical 
details.


Procedure:
Staff members who are away from work due to sickness must conform to the following procedure:
a) Employees must inform the line manager of absence from work through sickness or injury 
on the first day of absence by 10:00 am, or as soon as reasonably possible. If an employee is 
not able to notify the line manager, someone (e.g. a family member) should do so on his/her 
behalf. If the illness continues, the line manager should be kept informed of the likely date 
of return to work. If the line manager and/or HR department is not informed about the 
reason for absence by 10:00am on any day of absence, they will contact the employee at the 
numbers provided in their personnel records.

b) When reporting absence from work due to sickness, employees should give as much of 
following information as possible, in particular:
o The nature of illness - if the employee does not wish to reveal the exact nature of the 
illness s/he must indicate broadly the cause of the absence. If they are not willing to 
disclose this, the nature of the illness should be described as personal;
o The anticipated length of absence;
o If the absence is expected to be of 7 calendar days or more, any steps s/he is taking in 
relation to it e.g. details of any doctor's appointments arranged;
o Details of any outstanding or urgent work that needs to be dealt with during the 
absence;
o Details of how s/he can be contacted if necessary, especially where the employee is 
staying at a different address during their absence.
o Details of any referral by his/her GP to the DWP ‘Fit for Work’ service, including 
sharing the ‘Return to Work Plan’ with their manager and HR.


c) During absence from work, employees must be contactable by the Institute unless 
hospitalised etc and must also inform the Institute as soon as possible of any change in the 
date of the employee’s anticipated return to work;


d) Employees should expect to be contacted during their absence by their manager who will want 
to enquire after their health and be advised, if possible, of the expected return date. Given the 
nature of the Institute and its operational requirements, notification of absence and monitoring 
absence are essential. 


e) After any absence from 1 to 7 days a Self-Certificate of Sickness form1 must be signed, and 
submitted to the HR Department immediately on returning to work;

f)If the sick leave lasts for more than 7 days a doctor’s certificate must be obtained and 
submitted to the HR Department immediately on returning to work.


g) Failure to give notification and provide certification of sickness absence may result in loss 
of pay. Late notification may also result in the payment of Statutory Sick Pay being delayed.


h) For all absences, a return-to-work discussion may be held with the line manager, ranging 
from an informal check that an employee is feeling better for short absences to a one-toone meeting for longer absences; i.e. in case of five short term sickness absences or a total 
of 10 working days during any six-month period (pro rata for part-time and fixed-term staff). 
The purpose of this meeting is to establish whether there are any underlying reasons behind 
the illness, and to facilitate the employee’s return to work.


i) Where an employee becomes ill while at work and feels too unwell to continue working, s/he 
must speak to his/her manager who will give permission for the individual to leave their work 
(either temporarily or for the day) and for him/her to seek medical advice where appropriate. 


j) The Institute reserves the right to send employee home if it considers that the employee is
not fit enough to work. Where this happens employee will be considered to be on sickness 
absence and paid in accordance with our sick pay rules. To return to work the employee
will be required to provide a fit note from his/her doctor which signs him/her fit to work.


k) Any failure to comply with this provision will be considered a serious breach of the 
employee’s obligations and, depending on the circumstances, may result in disciplinary 
action, up to and including summary dismissal for proven acts of gross misconduct.
Sickness during holidays and Institute closure days
If an employee has been ill during annual leave or the Institute’s closure days, a doctor’s medical 
certificate is required to claim those days back.


Unauthorised absence
If employees do not report for work and have not telephoned their line manager to explain the 
reason for their absence, the line manager will try to contact the employee by telephone and in 
writing if necessary. This should not be treated as a substitute by the employee for reporting 
sickness absence.


If an employee fails to follow the sickness absence procedures set out in this document, he/she 
may be subject to action under the Institute's Disciplinary Procedure. Absence that has not been 
notified according to the sickness absence reporting procedure will be treated as unauthorised 
absence which may result in disciplinary action.


In exceptional circumstances, the Institute reserves the right to withhold Occupational Sick Pay if 
an individual does not cooperate with reasonable requests from HR or their line manager or, does 
not comply with the requirements within this Policy.


Line managers should contact HR directly to discuss individual cases if the reason given for the 
absence may be caused by work or may impact on the employee’s ability to undertake a particular 
work activity, or if there is repeated absence or continued absence. Similarly, if an employee 
believes that his/her condition may be related to an activity at work s/he should inform his/her 
manager who will contact HR.


Disabilities
Where an individual's sickness is disability-related, such cases will be managed in accordance with 
the legislation. Advice on specific cases can be sought from HR.
The Institute is aware that sickness absence may result from a disability. At each stage of the 
sickness absence procedure particular consideration will be given to whether there are reasonable 
adjustments that could be made to the requirements of a job or other aspects of working 
arrangements that will provide support at work, improve attendance and/or assist a return to work.
If an employee considers that s/he is affected by a disability or any medical condition which affects 
their ability to undertake their work, s/he should inform their line manager as soon as possible.
The Institute reserves the right to withhold Occupational sick pay during a grievance or disciplinary 
investigation or process.


Short-term intermittent absences
 In the case of five short term sickness absences or a total of 10 working days during any sixmonth period (pro-rata for part-time staff), the line manager will raise concern with the 
member of staff and investigate any particular circumstances concerning these periods of 
sickness absences. If appropriate, the staff member may be asked to undergo a medical 
examination by an independent doctor, at the expense of AKU-ISMC. The employee may also 
be asked to give written permission to AKU-ISMC to have access to a medical report in its 
complete form on the employee’s condition prepared by the independent medical practitioner, 
in order to establish the likely length of absence and the long-term effect on capability in 
relation to job performance and attendance at work.


Sickness absence meetings procedure
The Institute may apply this procedure whenever it is considered necessary, including, for example, 
if the employee:
 has been absent due to illness on a number of occasions;
 has been absent occasionally but the instances of the employee’s absences suggest a pattern or 
indicate to issue(s) considered worthy of investigation by the management;
 has discussed matters at a return-to-work interview that require investigation; and/or
 has been absent for more than 10 consecutive working days.
Unless it is impractical to do so, the Institute will give the employee 5 working days' written notice 
of the date, time and place of a sickness absence meeting. This will put any concerns about the 
employee’s sickness absence and the basis for those concerns in writing or otherwise advise why 
the meeting is being called. A reasonable opportunity for the employee to consider this before a 
meeting will be provided.


The meeting will be conducted by the line manager and will normally be attended by a member of 
HR. Employees may bring a colleague to the meeting.
Employees must take all reasonable steps to attend a meeting. Failure to do so without good reason 
may be treated as misconduct. If the employee or their colleague is unable to attend at the time 
specified, the employee should immediately inform his/her line manager who will seek to agree an 
alternative time.


A meeting may be adjourned if the line manager is awaiting receipt of information, needs to gather 
any further information or give consideration to matters discussed at a previous meeting. The 
employee will be given a reasonable opportunity to consider any new information obtained before 
the meeting is reconvened.


Confirmation of any decision made at a meeting, the reasons for it, and of the right of appeal will 
be given to the employee in writing within 5 working days of a sickness absence meeting (unless 
this time scale is not practicable, in which case it will be provided as soon as is practicable).
If, at any time, the line manager considers that the employee has taken or is taking sickness absence 
when they are not unwell, they may refer matters to be dealt with under the Institute’s Disciplinary 
Procedure.


The procedure adopted is as follows:
Stage 1 – Informal Sickness Absence Review Meeting
The purpose of the informal Review Meeting is:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To give the employee the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns;
 To decide whether any further action is required such as a referral to HR
 To set a target for improvement and a period over which absence levels will be monitored;
 To arrange for support or work adjustments; and
 To inform the employee that if attendance does not improve within the time period being 
monitored a formal Sickness Absence Review meeting will be held.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
When setting targets for improvement, managers will need to take into account the individual 
circumstances of the case, any advice received from HR, the impact of any underlying medical 
condition or disability, and any reasonable work place adjustments that need to be put in place to 
enable the employee to improve their attendance. Managers must review these targets and 
achievement levels with the employee every two weeks over the next 2-3 months as agreed.
The outcome of the Sickness Absence Review meeting will be confirmed to the individual in 
writing by their manager within 10 working days, and a copy sent to HR.


As confirmed at the Sickness Absence Review Meeting the individual's sickness absence pattern 
will be monitored over an appropriate, specified period. During this period, regular reviews should 
be undertaken by the manager to review the employee’s attendance, give them an opportunity to 
discuss any problems they have encountered, discuss the need for further medical advice and 
ensure that any reasonable adjustments recommended have been put in place and that they are 
receiving the support needed to improve their attendance at work.


Stage 2 – Formal Sickness Absence Review Meeting
If during the specified monitoring period following the informal Sickness Absence Review 
meeting, absence exceeds the improvement target set this will trigger a formal Sickness Absence 
Review meeting with the manager and HR. The purpose of the 2nd Review Meeting will be as 
follows:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To review the steps that have been taken to support him/her in achieving the required level 
of attendance;
 To give the employee the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns;
 To discuss any HR and/or medical advice that has been received;
 To decide whether any new information requires further medical investigation
 To set a target for improvement and a period over which absence levels will be monitored;
 To inform the employee that if attendance does not improve a final Sickness Absence Review 
meeting will be held.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
Again, if the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, 
s/he may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed.


The outcome of the Formal Sickness Absence Review meeting will be confirmed to the individual 
in writing by their manager within 10 working days and a copy sent to HR.
Regular reviews will be undertaken by the manager during the monitoring period. A Final Caution 
may be given for unsatisfactory attendance and this will be confirmed to the individual in writing. 
If it has been decided not to issue a final caution, but to extend the monitoring period, the 
individual's sickness absence pattern will be monitored over an appropriate, specified period. 
If, after a period of satisfactory improvement based on the targets set, the individual's absence 
levels reach those defined above (repeated short term absence), Stage 2 of the Sickness Absence 
Policy may be repeated.


Stage 3 - Final Absence Review Meeting: Dismissal
If during the specified monitoring period following the issue of a final caution, absence exceeds 
the improvement target this will trigger a Final Sickness Absence Review meeting. The meeting 
will normally be with the Head of Department, the line manager of the employee and HR.
The purpose of this meeting will be as follows:
 To review the employee’s attendance record during the relevant period;
 To review the steps that have been taken to support him/her in achieving the required level 
of attendance;
 To give him/her the opportunity to discuss any problems or raise any concerns, or to highlight 
any mitigating circumstances that they wish to be taken into account; 
 To discuss any medical advice that has been received;
 To decide whether any new information requires further referral to Institute’s medical 
advisor(s).
 To inform them of whether they will be dismissed on the grounds of capability, or whether 
the final caution will be extended to allow further time for a sustained improvement;
 If the final caution is extended, to set a target for improvement and a period over which 
absence levels will be monitored.


The employee will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the meeting (unless the 
employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied by a work colleague. 
If the work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he may request 
postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested alternative is 
reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be postponed.
Following the meeting, a decision will be taken by the Head of Department to either dismiss the 
employee on the grounds of capability, or, to extend the final caution to allow further time for a 
sustained improvement. The option of allowing further time for improvement will only be 
considered if there is evidence that this is likely to lead to the required improvement in attendance.
In the event that the final caution is extended, the individual's sickness absence pattern will be 
monitored over an appropriate, specified period.


Regular reviews will be undertaken by the line manager during the monitoring period
The Head of Department will confirm the decision, the reasons for it and the right of appeal in 
the case of dismissal, in writing to the individual. If, following an extension of the final caution 
and after a period of satisfactory improvement based on the target set, the individual's absence 
levels deteriorate and reach those defined above (repeated short term absence), Stage 3 of the 
Sickness Absence Policy may be repeated which may result in a decision to dismiss the employee 
on the grounds of incapacity.


Right to be accompanied at meetings
The employee may bring a work colleague to any meeting or appeal meeting under this procedure.
Their details must be given to the manager conducting the meeting, in good time before it takes 
place.


Employees are allowed reasonable time off from duties without loss of pay to act as a colleague. 
However, they are not obliged to act as a colleague and may decline a request if they so wish.
A colleague may make representations, ask questions, and sum up, but will not be allowed to 
answer questions on behalf of the employee. The employee may confer privately with their 
companion at any time during a meeting.


If the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he 
may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed. A representative from HR may also be present to give advice on procedure and take 
notes.


Long term Sickness Absence
Managers should seek the advice of HR in cases of long-term sickness absence of 4 weeks or more, 
sooner if there is indication that the health issue may be related to work. Evidence based guidelines 
recommend early intervention, particularly for mental health or musculoskeletal problems.
They should also maintain contact with the employee in order to reduce feelings of isolation, to 
remain informed about the likely duration of the sickness absence and to keep them in touch with 
any major workplace developments. Managers should not, however, have detailed discussions 
regarding work-related issues with employees who are absent. The employee has a responsibility 
to update his/her manager regularly on his/her likely date of return to work.


In such cases, a referral to the Institute is appointed Medical Advisor(s) will usually be made for 
advice on the employee's fitness for work, a likely date of return and advice on a rehabilitation 
programme, if necessary, to enable the employee to return to work. Where the hours of work are 
reduced as part of a rehabilitation programme, this would normally be on full pay for a limited 
period. If the normal hours of work are reduced over a longer period, a corresponding reduction 
in salary may result. However, the individual circumstances of the case will be taken into account.
Where appropriate, once medical advice has been received, the individual will be invited in writing 
to a meeting with his/her manager and HR. S/he may choose to be accompanied by a colleague, 
and at least 7 calendar days’ notice will be given (unless the employee agrees in writing to less). If 
the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the appointed time, s/he 
may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where the suggested 
alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting will be 
postponed. If the individual is unable to travel, the meeting will be conducted via the telephone 
or, in exceptional circumstances, a meeting may take place at a venue nearer to his/her home. 
Alternatively, a written representation can be submitted.


If the employee is considered by the Medical Advisor(s) to be unfit to resume his/her duties, 
despite reasonable adjustments being made, job redesign, an amendment to the job description or 
redeployment into another type of work will be explored with advice from HR. Medical advice 
provided and the individual's views will be taken into account in the exploration of options. In 
some cases more than one meeting will be necessary. If reasonable adjustments or redeployment 
is not possible, HR will advise individuals of their entitlements in such circumstances. Following 
the meeting, the content of the discussion and any action to be taken, will be confirmed in writing.
If an employee is deemed unfit for employment, and after all the above options have been 
explored, consideration will be given to termination of his/her employment. The employee will be 
invited to attend a meeting with their Head of Department and HR to discuss the proposed 
termination of their employment. They will be given at least 7 calendar days' written notice of the 
meeting (unless the employee agrees, in writing, to less) and s/he may choose to be accompanied 
by a work colleague. If the individual's work colleague is unavailable to attend the meeting at the 
appointed time, s/he may request postponement and suggest an alternative time and date. Where 
the suggested alternative is reasonable and within 5 working days of the original date, the meeting 
will be postponed. Following consultation, if termination of employment is appropriate this will 
be confirmed in writing by HR. The right of appeal against the decision and the appeals procedure 
will also be explained.


If the employee is considered by Institute’s medical advisor(s) to be fit for work, this will be 
discussed with the individual and a return to work date will be set. In exceptional circumstances, 
if s/he does not return to work on the date advised, entitlement to Occupational Sick Pay may be 
withdrawn and disciplinary action may be taken. Entitlement to Statutory Sick Pay will not be 
affected if the continued absence is covered by a medical certificate.


Once the employee has returned to work, the manager should hold a return to work interview with 
them. At this meeting, any advice given by the Medical Advisor(s) for rehabilitation and support 
to facilitate a sustained return to work will be discussed, as well as any re-training that may be 
necessary and any expectations by the employee of any further periods of absence.


Appeal Procedure
Employees wishing to appeal against any formal action taken under this policy should submit a 
letter to the Head of HR within seven calendar days of the receipt of the formal letter confirming 
the action to be taken, stating the grounds of appeal. The formal action taken will remain in force 
unless and until it is modified as a result of the appeal.


An Appeal Hearing is not designed to re-hear the case but to examine the grounds of appeal. The 
appellant must be specific about the grounds of appeal; these will effectively form the agenda for 
the hearing. Appeals will be raised on one of the following grounds:
 the procedure: a failure to follow procedure had a material effect on the decision 
 the evidence did not support the conclusion reached: the penalty - was too severe given the 
circumstances of the case
 new evidence - which has genuinely come to light since the first hearing.


Arrangements will be made for appeals to be heard as soon as reasonably practicable.
The appellant will be notified as soon as possible of the time, date and place of the appeal hearing 
with a minimum of 10 working days’ notice. The appellant will be advised that s/he may be 
accompanied by a workplace colleague.


The Appeal will be heard by a panel of two senior members of staff who have not previously been 
involved in the case, and the Head of HR or nominated alternative.
Where the appeal is upheld, the formal action specified will no longer be applied. If the appeal is 
not upheld but the Appeal Panel considered the sanction to be inappropriate, this may be reviewed. 
Where an appeal against dismissal is upheld, the employee shall be paid in full for the period from 
the date of dismissal and continuity of service will be maintained.


The result of the appeal will normally be notified to the appellant orally within one day and in 
writing within 10 working days of the hearing. A copy will also be sent to any representative.
The decision of the Appeal Panel is final.


Sick Pay
Employees are entitled to SSP subject to the SSP rules, and in addition to this, employees may be 
entitled to his/her normal salary for sickness absence of up to 15 days in any one year, and subject 
to complying with sickness notification procedures. The Institute reserves the right to withhold 
sick pay in circumstances where the certification procedure described above has not been followed 
or it has reason to doubt the validity of the sickness absence claim and may request the employee
to undertake a medical examination by a doctor selected by it. Any payments over the SSP rate is 
at the discretion of the Institute and each case will be decided upon its own set of facts and 
circumstances.
For the current rates on Statutory Sick Pay, contact the HR Department.
Employees will not be permitted to use annual leave to claim contractual pay for sickness absences 
and the above sick pay policy will apply in all cases.


Medical Appointments
Employees may be allowed discretionary time off to attend medical appointments with prior 
approval of their supervisor. Employees must make every effort to ensure that their appointment 
times cause as little disruption as possible to the working day of the Institute. Where possible, 
early morning or late afternoon appointments should be booked. In addition, employees should 
ensure that their work/area of responsibility is covered by colleagues and that if need be their 
supervisor has made the necessary arrangements for temporary cover. Employees will be 
expected to make-up the hours taken for this purpose. HR will monitor the number of requests 
made by employees, and where excessive, the employee may be required to request annual leave
or unpaid leave in order to meet a medical appointment